
Frederick Mosteller

1. The Sock Drawer
A drawer contains red socks and black socks. When two socks are drawn at random, the probability
that both are red is 1/2. (a) how small can the number of socks in the drawer be? (b) How small if
the number of black socks is even?

2. Successive Wins
To encourage Elmer's promising tennis career, his father offers him a prize if he wins (at least)
two tennis sets in a row in a three-set series to be played with his father and the club champion
alternately: father-champion-father or champion-father-champion, according to Elmer's choice. The
champion is a better player than Elmer's father. Which series should Elmer choose?

3. The Flippant Juror
A three-man jury has two members each of whom independently has probability p of making the correct
decision and a third member who flips a coin for each decision (majority rules). A one-man jury has
probability p of making the correct decision. Which jury has the better probability of making the
correct decision?

4. Trials until First Success
On the average, how many times must a die be thrown until one gets a 6?

5. Coin in Square
In a common carnival game a player tosses a penny from a distance of about 5 feet onto the surface
of a table ruled in 1-inch squares. If the penny (3/4 inch in diameter) falls entirely inside a
square, the player receives 5 cents but does not get his penny back; otherwise he loses his penny.
If the penny lands on the table, what is his chance to win?

6. Chuck-a-Luck
Chuck-a-Luck is a gambling game often played at carnivals and gambling houses. A player may bet on
any one of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Three dice are rolled. If the player's number appears on
one, two, or three of the dice, he receives respectively one, two, or three times his original stake
plus his own money back; otherwise he loses his stake. What is the player's expected loss per unit
stake? (Actually the player may distribute stakes on several numbers, but each such stake can be
regarded as a separate bet.)

7. Curing the Compulsive Gambler
Mr. Brown always bets a dollar on the number 13 at roulette against the advice of Kind Friend. To
help cure Mr. Brown of playing roulette, Kind Friend always bets Brown $20 at even money that Brown
will be behind at the end of 36 plays. How is the cure working? (Most American roulette wheels have
38 equally likely numbers. If the player's number comes up, he is paid 35 times his stake and gets
his original stake back; otherwise he loses his stake.)

8. Perfect Bridge Hand
We often read of someone who has been dealt 13 spades at bridge. With a well-shuffled pack of cards,
what is the chance that you are dealt a perfect hand (13 of one suit)? (Bridge is played with an
ordinary pack of 52 cards, 13 in each of 4 suits, and each of 4 players is dealt 13.)

9. Craps
The game of craps, played with two dice, is one of America's fastest and most popular gambling games.
Calculating the odds associated with it is an instructive exercise. The rules are these. Only totals
for the two dice count. The player throws the dice and wins at once if the total for the first throw
is 7 or 11, loses at once if it is 2, 3, or 12. Any other throw is called his "point." If the first
throw is a point, the player throws the dice repeatedly until he either wins by throwing his point
again or loses by throwing 7. What is the player's chance to win?

10. An Experiment in Personal Taste for Money
(a) An urn contains 10 black balls and 10 white balls, identical except for color. You choose "black"
or "white." One ball is drawn at random, and if its color matches your choice, you get $10,
otherwise nothing. Write down the maximum amount you are willing to pay to play the game. The game
will be played just once.
(b) A friend of yours has available many black and many white balls, and he puts black and white
balls into the urn to suit himself. You choose "black" or "white." A ball is drawn randomly from
this urn. Write down the maximum amount you are willing to pay to play this game. The game will be
played just once.

