
q: was there any key event that brought you into the game?

a: no, no key event like 'buying my first stock'. took part in some trading contest while at school.

q: how did you get to professional trading?

a: when I was apprentice in a German bank I had to work on the DTB (now EUREX) execution desk for
several weeks. this attracted me a lot. during that time I was doing gamble trades on my private
account, losing pretty much all of it. when it was deeply in the red, I had to leave the bank but
shortly after, I was allowed to start trading in a Japanese bank. I was very lucky here, since I was
allowed to gain knowledge through learning by doing.

q: did the bank give you any mentor?

a: not, I didn't have one. in the beginning I was exchanging ideas with the chief trader Ajiasaka,
who was constantly profitable. he sometimes even hedged the positions of his boss, when he thought
that his boss was wrong. I had many conversations about market psychology, which proved to be very
helpful, especially after bad losing days.

q: how was your trading back then? have you been constantly profitable from the very beginning?

a: I was doing 100 - 150 round turns a day after a short time... I had no losing month with the
first 3 years of my trading. later on with bigger position sizes I took occasional hits, especially
after EUREX allowed terminals in the US and big players like Harris Brumfield/Chicago were entering
the field.

q: there is a saying that every trader has to completely blow up his account at least once before he
can become successful. what did you learn out of it?

a: like I earlier said, my private account saw some bad times during my apprentice in the bank,
although I must admit, that back then I had absolutely no idea that there was something like
'risk-management'. later on I found 7-digit losses to be cumbering. on day I had a blackout and
after losing 2,5 million euros I was seriously thinking about stopping. I still had enough capital
left to live without having to worry about financial issues and I just wouldn't want to take those
psychological hits anymore. after taking 4 weeks off, I regained my motivation and returned in the
ring. I was able to make up the loss in a relatively short period of time, so that I came out
stronger than before.

q: has this changed the views of the market in a way?

a: with the experience of bigger losing days coupled with good phases right afterwards, I'm not so
sensible for losing days anymore. I know that I can make it back. this has lead to being able to
switch off the screens on a day with medium/small losses more easily, instead of forcing the way
back into positive territory.

q: what are your strengths as a world-class trader and where are the differences between you and
other traders?

a: it's the ability to get more aggressive in winning phases, taking bigger risks, and scaling back
in losing times. this is against human nature. the best thing is to have somebody around who is
neutral to trading, that switches the terminals off, when a certain loss level has been reached for
the day.

q: you are known as a order book-scalper, could you please explaining to our readers what you are
doing and what your strategies look like? what is your tactic?

a: it's some kind of market making where you place buy and sell orders simultaneously, making very
short-term trading decisions b/c of certain events in the order book (level2). for example, I
usually have lots of orders in different markets at the same time, pretty close to the last traded
price. the resulting trades are usually a zero sum game, but I get a pretty good feeling for what is
going on and then ultimately can make a decision for a larger trade.

q: how long are you usually in a position?

a: since I do trend plays very seldom and actually scalp the market, I constantly get fills in
different markets on both sides which can cause constantly changing positions for hours. sometimes I
change my opinion several times within a couple of minutes, which is not pretty hard for me, since
I'm only looking for the next 3-5 ticks.

q: during your professional career, have you always been a scalper or did you try other strategies
(momentum/swing) as well?

a: yes, I have always been a scalper, but I am adjusting my strategies to different market
situations all the time. on volatile days I of course have less orders in the market and do more
'single trades', although I usually hold them only for a couple of seconds.

q: your strategies only work on electronic exchanges?

a: yes, b/c you cannot handle that much orders in a pit, looking for counterparties and so on.
computer exchanges grant fast order flow and are not as easy to manipulate.

q: as a scalper, are you trying to run stops?

a: well, yes, but because of the increase of liquidity in the last couple of years, the fast spikes
caused by stops are not happening that often anymore. apart from that, that stops often are not
where you would suppose them to be, because the other market participants are not silly either or
learned their lesson in the past.

q: what role plays risk-management in your trading?

a: I set daily goals for my p&l, whereas the most important thing is the stopping limit, the maximum
loss I take, before I switch off the screens. my biggest positions are 5 digit number of contracts.
I don't use any specific money-management rules.

q: what are you doing when a position goes against you? are you using stop-loss orders?

a: I strictly close my position when they start going against me. with bigger positions this is not
that easy, because I move the market against me, which could cause other traders to get in the same
situation like me, which could accelerate the move. however, most of the time I am able to make some
of the losses up, b/c I know what caused that move and therefore take the opposite position.

q: why don't you have any problems with closing out the position and even taking the opposite
direction? shouldn't a trader stick to his opinion?

a: no, definitely not. an analyst or some kind of guru has to stick to it, but as a trader you
should have no opinion. the more opinion you have, the harder gets it to get out of a losing
position.

q: what role plays market psychology?

a: I constantly try to read the psychology of the market and base my decisions on it.

q: how do you handle distracting thoughts and emotions?

a: when it gets really bad - taking a cold shower or jumping in a cold swimming pool.

q: how do you prepare for the trading day? do you follow any routines or do you take it as it comes?

a: before the open I check all the economic reports that are about to be released, speeches of
central bankers - simply anything that could move the market. then I try to define important levels
in the markets I trade. I do this through my own analysis and through reading analyst commentaries.
that's how I get a picture of the market and its important levels. I am not interested in opinions
of other market participants as this would influence my own opinion.

q: any kind of mental preparation?

a: nothing specific. actually I am motivated all the time... I see trading more as a sporting
challenge and try to erase the thought of the money.

q: how many hours do you spend in front of your screens?

a: usually 5 hours, that's when I trade actively... in case of special events I can be up to 11
hours.

q: isn't it hard to spend that much time in front of your pc's? how do you stay concentrated for
such a long time?

a: that is what my Japanese colleagues asked themselves as well... well I take it as some kind of
game where I forget the time. therefore the real troubles are more physical (eyes) than
psychological.

q: what do you do to calm down/relax?

a: I do lots of sports and take lots of vacations.

q: what equipment do you use?

a: MD-trader from TT, Reuters, Bloomberg, CQG and a USD-squawkbox.

q: why a USD-squawk box?

a: I use it because euro/$ had some effects on the interest rates over the last couple of months.
those effects change, right now it influences oil prices and the DAX.

q: what timeframes are you using on your charts?

a: usually 5- - 30-min charts for trendlines and indicators. I prefer p&f charts because they give
me a clearer view on patterns (triple tops). for indicators I like the CCI because it also shows the
volatility of the markets.

q: do you think is it possible for a single player to manipulate the market?

a: no, in my opinion a single player cannot influence the market around the clock. there are always
several big players in the market. take the BUND for example - there are one million contracts
traded a day. when a trend starts out of the blue with only slight pullbacks, I could trade against
it, but with no effect. I couldn't stop the market from going up, because there would be more money
needed that I could bring in. apart from that, so-called 'Analytics' computerized scalpers have made
it tougher for me lately. as far as I know they are analyzing the behavior in the order book and
create a fully automated system. since they act in several markets at the same time, I think these
computer freak come from the fully automated arbitrage- and spread-trading.

q: what has one to do if he wants to become a scalper?

a: he has to watch the order book for a very long time.




JP: Paul can you tell me a bit about how you got into trading and your trading style?

PR: I started trading about 20 years ago, when I was an apprentice to become a banker at a German
bank in Munich. During that apprenticeship I had already spent one year in the trading room at
HypoVereinsbank in Munich. I was basically entering trades into the computer system for clients of
the bank. They were trades that had been made over the Deutsche TerminBorse (DTB - a German futures
exchange) as it was known back then. I then moved to Frankfurt to work for Daiwa Securities as a
junior trader and learned by doing it. I had never traded at this stage. So I started trading small
contracts on the Dax (the main German stock market index) for around 6 months before I switched to
the bond markets.

JP: And how did that go?

PR: Actually I was profitable right from the beginning, not every day, but I never had a losing
month in the two years I was at Daiwa. It was a very easy market back then, you couldn't trade that
easily now. Electronic trading hadn't really started yet. In terms of volume the main activity was
in London on the LIFFE (The London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange). On the DTB
there were mainly the arbitrageurs and there weren't that many other traders there. So sometimes it
was really like having a free lunch. You could take the Bobl (5 year German government bond) and it
just lacked movement unlike the Bund (longer maturity German government bond). So the Bund moved and
the Bobl didn't, so you just bought the Bobl and waited for some time for it to move. Of course
today it is a very different story with all the algorithmic systems, which arbitrage everything so
there is no longer this kind of opportunity. It was a much easier trade than trading the news like
Non-Farm Payrolls. These days automated algorithmic traders have their servers connected right next
to Bloomberg's and next to the exchanges so they've already reacted very quickly, much faster than
someone can manually. At Daiwa I was trading small sizes, which were easy to get out of so I had
flexibility. I was mainly doing directional trading.

JP: While you were at Daiwa did you have a mentor?

PR: Yeah, there was one, though he wasn't necessarily a mentor. I was doing my own thing like
discovering technical analysis and he was the head of the trading desk and he was profitable almost
every day. Actually, he didn't look at any kind of indicators as such, but followed his opinion. He
would explain to me on a chart about where all these people bought and where they would have to get
out. So it was like looking at the psychology of the market and reading it. He didn't trade much. I
was always the guy who traded a lot, sometimes up to a 100 trades a day. He would be shaking his
head saying you can get old trading like that. But I learned a lot from him about market psychology.

JP: Can you give some insights into the tools and strategies you use?

PR: I have changed a lot over the years and I have stopped the really short term trading, where I
was trading a couple of ticks and doing a kind of market making style. I stopped this a couple of
years ago because of potential regulatory issues and also because of the evolution of all the
algorithmic trading out there. Now you have the FBI investigating algorithmic trading because what
the algorithmic traders do is market manipulation, but somehow it is legal. If I put in orders and
then cancelled them, I could be accused of market manipulation. But they do it in micro-seconds at
the rate of 100,000's of times a day, putting in and cancelling orders, and no one really stops them.
So for these reasons I am now doing more mid- to long-term trades in a variety of markets and I
don't just concentrate on my core markets (bonds) which I was doing until I stopped short-term
trading. But I was always looking at technical analysis. I was never really a fundamentals follower,
except for news releases. I was always following the technicals and trying to read market psychology.
The main technical analysis tool I use are point and figure charts. I was already using them 20
years ago so this is the main one for me really.

JP: So do you use indicators such as RSI, MACD and other tools such as trend lines and support and
resistance?

PR: Trend lines and support and resistance - yes. But I stopped using all the indicators like RSI,
although I was using them about 20 years ago, but I never relied on them. But for very short term
trading they don't really help much. What's more important is the market's behaviour around support
and resistance levels. Also, back in the old days I was gaining information from my trading, having
bids and offers in many different markets and from my fills I could feel what the market wanted to
do by how it reacted to my orders. About 10 years ago some people were complaining about my level of
trading, but what they didn't understand is that I was using my trading to gain information.
Sometimes I would sell at the low and someone would laugh at me for doing that, but I actually
gained information, maybe by seeing there was big demand at that level. If they lifted a big offer
of mine then I knew someone wants to buy and then I would try to go long. So it was very different
thinking to what these guys thought I was doing.

JP: Just coming back to short-term trading, with all these algorithmic trading platforms in market,
do you think it is now impossible for small traders to make money out of scalping forex?

PR: If I was to start trading today, I think I would even do foreign exchange because I think it is
really easy to do the real scalping for a few pips here and there, especially after some number
releases or someone's speech. The (forex) markets can be really choppy. Of course you must have some
feeling for the market. You put in orders in a 5 to 10 tick range and you get filled on the bids and
offers in this environment. Of course you must have some tight stop losses. For retail traders they
may not be able to tell where the market is going, but they can use the good short-term volatility
for scalping.

JP: Have you ever traded forex?

PR: I don't really trade forex, but I am involved in it for money management purposes. Maybe I could
trade it for short-term moves such as break-outs, but for longer-term trading and to predict
direction it is really not that easy. Because some news or someone speaks and the market can just go
completely the other way.

JP: What is your typical trading day like?

PR: Back in the old days (when trading intensively) I would try and take regular breaks. I would be
at the trading desk at 8 AM (Central European Time) in the morning because I really liked the
opening trades, which were always very interesting. I would trade for two or three hours in the
morning, then there would be the US market open at 2.20-2.30 PM (Central European Time). They opened
and there would usually be some economic numbers released. At 5 PM it would usually be the end,
because the cash market would be closed in Europe. Of course now they have extended the trading
times of all these markets.

JP: So I guess these days you come into your office, read all the news, look at the up coming data
releases etc... and maybe plan your trading campaign?

PR: No I never really plan a campaign. Of course I look at the charts and if I see a really big
level right at the open then maybe I will plan something. But usually if there aren't any special
levels or something then I don't do anything. I can trade from nothing, just give me a computer and
some charts. For instance I can see that some big news release is due, because market liquidity has
dried up. I can just trade - I don't need to study and prepare myself, but of course it is better to
prepare. So normally I have my charts and I have the news feed running and squawk boxes as well. In
the old days this was very important to me to know what news was coming, what rumours were going
around and so on. This was especially so because I liked to sit on my own away from other traders. I
concentrate better on my own.

JP: What do you think separates moderately successful traders from very successful traders?

PR: I think everybody would say it is the discipline and money management, which is actually very
hard. Many years ago when I was at Daiwa and even when I went off with some other partners we always
had someone who looked at our P&L. If you were down a certain amount you would have to reduce your
position size and if you were down even more then you have to turn off your computer. When I was
trading on my own I didn't have the benefit of that person enforcing discipline. If you have someone
to do that then it is fantastic because it is very important. Some days nothing works. And next day
you come in and everything is fantastic. I remember when I was at Daiwa and when I was having a bad
day the chief trader would tell me "you have blood in your head" and tell me to go out and get "some
fresh air." When you have blood in your head you shouldn't try to make the money back or get angry.
I used to get angry with myself when I made a mistake or something went wrong. But if you follow
your strategy and lose then it is bad luck. Sometimes I traded at times when I shouldn't have traded
because it was not my market , but I still traded anyway and lost money. So in those situations, you
must have strict money management, reduce your size or stop trading for a while. So I think when you
are losing it's good to stop and get some perspective. (Talking about highly successful traders)
Then you have some more talented people who can really feel the market. So when the charts say you
should go long, but then it doesn't go up, these people will act against logic and go in the
opposite direction because the market will go the other way. So you need to be mentally flexible.

JP: Tell me a bit about your scalping?

PR: I can tell you one day I was losing and trading 1 million contracts - usually it was
100,000-200,000 contracts a day - that could be 100 trading decisions a day. I would have permanent
fills on both sides, I was always feeling out the market, seeing how my orders were filled and
sometimes I would trade break-outs. I was a scalper sort of like a high frequency trader before the
algorithmic systems came.

JP: What would you say are the main differences psychologically between scalpers and long-term
traders as you have done both?

PR: I think it is even more stressful if you're a longer-term trader because you hold the positions
that might be wrong and not going your way. Something can happen over-night, and I think you need
stronger nerves.

JP: Interesting you say that because some people I've spoken with think scalping is more stressful
because of the amount of trading you do:

PR: You must really like scalping to do it. It never affected my heart rate, but I did have some
digestive problems after a while. To be good at it you need to be able to make decisions quickly. So
for example I would sometimes buy and then look up the news to see what had happened to move the
market. Other people would read the news first to decide what to do, but that would be too late.

JP: How has moving from short-term to longer-term trading impacted your swings in profitability?

PR: That is a hard question. When I started out and I was telling you that I had no losing months...
that changed when I increased the size of my positions. Sometimes I would get hit badly because I
had a huge position. Now I have much smaller positions in many more markets, so I maybe don't have
so many swings in P&L.

JP: So your pursuing a diversification strategy?

PR: Yes, this prevents big P&L swings. With the big positions I used to take, it could sometimes be
hard to exit them. The worst day I had was in 2008 when Socgen (the French bank) was liquidating
contracts accumulated by their trader Jerome Kerviel (he lost Socgen euro4.9 billion). They were
selling his positions in the DAX and some other Euro stocks and the market dropped something like
1,000-1,200 points in 2 days. So I bought into the market a couple of times and got hit badly,
because liquidity was down. I think there was a US public holiday as well.

JP: It must have taken you a while to recover from that?

PR: Yes, I lost badly those 2 days. I was on my own, I didn't really have risk management and I
should have stopped and I just couldn't believe what was happening so I would buy again.

JP: Which traders do you most admire?

PR: When I started I admired Tom Baldwin (a bond trader often credited with being able to single
handedly move the US Treasuries market) who traded on the Chicago Board of Trade, but I didn't know
that many traders at the time. But I knew of these traders in the trading pits we were listening to
on the 'squawk boxes' from Chicago and London. At that time Baldwin was a big trader in treasury
bonds, so when someone said Tom is on the bid then everyone would start buying. It was always
important to know what he was doing. Of course I also read books like Market Wizards by Jack
Schwager, which has interviews with all these traders. But of course I haven't met them and only
read about them. Paul Tudor Jones is a fantastic trader of course as well.

JP: Which books about trading would rate as among some of the best you've ever read?

PR: Definitely Market Wizards and also some of the other books written by Jack Schwager. I also
really liked Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets by John J. Murphy. I haven't read any books
recently about trading, but 10-15 years ago I read a lot of books about trading. There were a number
of books I read about point and figure charts, which I really liked, but I can't remember their
titles. But the Market Wizard books were really good. It was great to find out about these different
traders in different markets. It was very interesting to hear about the psychology and the different
trading styles. I also read George Soros's books, such as the Alchemy of Finance, which was a
fantastic book.

JP: What would you advise someone starting to trade today to do?

PR: It depends what they want to do. The scalpers are more likely to be people from the street, not
necessarily the ones from the universities. For a very smart guy with a good idea of markets and
valuations then I would advise him not to scalp. 20 years ago it was fantastic, when there was no
algorithmic trading. They've taken the easy money off the table - they just front run and arbitrage
everything. I think it's (scalping) a much harder playing field for someone just starting out. Today
I would recommend people go for longer-term trading or go for an investment style approach. For
scalping I think some of the less liquid Asian stock markets where the algorithmic traders aren't
operating and the forex markets are a good choice.

JP: Any final thoughts about trading?

PR: Yes, I would say trading is not really for humans. When they're profitable they become cautious
and when they lose money they start taking more risks and lose more, which is the exact opposite of
good trading. So a person must decide if they can take risk and if they can make decisions quickly.

