
Charlie Munger

Well no doubt many of you are wondering why the speaker is so old, well the answer is obviously he
hasn't died yet. And why was the speaker chosen? Well I don't know that either. I like to think that
the development department had nothing to do with it. Whatever the reason I think it's very fitting
that I'm sitting here because I see one crowd of faces in the rear not wearing robes, and I know,
from having educated an army of descendants, who really deserves a lot of the honors that are being
given are the people here upfront. The sacrifice and the wisdom and the value transfer that comes
from one generation to the next can never be underrated. And that gives me enormous pleasure as I
look at this sea of Asian faces to my left. All my life I've admired Confucius. I like the idea of
filial piety, the idea that there are values that are taught and duties that come naturally and all
that should be passed on to the next generation. And you people who don't think there's anything in
this idea, please note how fast these Asian faces are rising in American life. I think they have
something.

All right, I scratched out a few notes and I'm going to try and just give an account of some ideas
and attitudes that have worked well for me. I don't claim that they are perfect for everybody.
Although I think many of them are pretty close to Universal values and many of them are can't fail
ideas. What are the core ideas that have helped me? Well luckily I got at a very early age, the idea
that the safest way to try and get what you want, is to try and deserve what you want. It's such a
simple idea, it's the golden rule so to speak. You want to deliver to the world what you would buy
if you were on the other end. There is no ethos in my opinion, that is better for any lawyer or any
other person to have. By and large the people who have this ethos win in life and they don't win
just money, just honors *unclear*. They win the respect, the deserved trust, of the people they deal
with, and there is huge pleasure in life to be obtained from getting deserved trust. And so the way
to get it is to deliver what you'd want to buy if the circumstances were reversed. Occasionally you
find a perfect rogue of a person, who dies rich and widely known. But mostly these people are fully
understood by the surrounding civilization, and when the cathedral is full of people at the funeral
ceremony, most of them are there to celebrate the fact that the person is dead. And, that reminds me
of the story of the time when one of these people died and the minister said, "it's now time for
someone to say something nice about the deceased". And nobody came forward. And nobody came forward.
And nobody came forward. And finally one man came up and he said, "well, his brother was worse".
That is not where you want to go! That's not the kind of funeral you want to have you'll leave
entirely the wrong example.

A second idea that I got very early was that there is no love that's so right as admiration based
love, and that love should include the instructive dead. Somehow I got that idea and I lived with it
all my life and it's been very very useful to me. A love like that celebrated by Somerset Maugham
and his book "Of Human Bondage" that's a sick kind of love, it's a disease. And if you find yourself
in a disease like that my advice to you is turn around and fix it. Eliminate it.

Another idea that I got and this may remind you of Confucius too, is that wisdom acquisition is a
moral duty, it's not something you do just to advance in life. Wisdom acquisition is a moral duty.
And there's a corollary to that proposition which is very important, it means that you're hooked for
lifetime learning, and without lifetime learning you people are not going to do very well. You are
not going to get very far in life based on what you already know. You're going to advance in life by
what you're going to learn after you leave here. If you take Berkshire Hathaway which is certainly
one of the best regarded corporations in the world and may have the best long-term investment record
in the entire history of civilization. The skill that got Berkshire through one decade would not
have sufficed to get it through the next decade with the achievements made. Without Warren Buffett
being a learning machine, a continuous learning machine, the record would have been absolutely
impossible. The same is true at lower walks of life. I constantly see people rise in life who are
not the smartest, sometimes not even the most diligent, but they are learning machines, they go to
bed every night a little wiser than when they got up and boy does that help particularly when you
have a long run ahead of you.

Alfred North Whitehead said it one time that "the rapid advance of civilization came only when man
invented the method of invention", and of course he was referring to the huge growth of GDP per
capita and all the other good things that we now take for granted which started a few hundred years
ago and before that all was stasis. So if civilization can progress only when it invents the method
of invention, you can progress only when you learn the method of learning. I was very lucky. I came
to law school having learned the method of learning and nothing has served me better in my long life
than continuous learning. And if you take Warren Buffett and watched him with a time clock, I would
say half of all the time he spends is sitting on his ass and reading. And a big chunk of the rest of
the time is spent talking one on one either on the telephone or personally with highly gifted people
whom he trusts and who trust him. In other words it looks quite academic all this worldly success.

Academia has many wonderful values in it. I came across such a value not too long ago. It was
several years ago. In my capacity as a hospital board chairman I was dealing with a medical school
academic. And this man over years of hard work had made himself know more about bone tumor pathology
than almost anybody else in the world. And he wanted to pass this knowledge on to the rest of us.
And how was he going to do it? Well he decided to write a textbook that would be very useful to
other people. And I don't think a textbook like this sells two thousand copies if those two thousand
copies are in all the major cancer centers in the world. He took a year sabbatical, he sat down in
his computer and he had all the slides because he saved them and organized them and filed them. He
worked 17 hours a day, 7 days a week, for a year and that was his sabbatical. At the end of the year
he had one of the great bone tumor pathology textbooks in the world. When you're around values like
that, you want to pick up as much as you can.

Another idea that was hugely useful to me was that I listened in law school when some wag said, "A
legal mind is a mind that when two things are all twisted up together and interacting, it's feasible
to think responsibly about one thing and not the other." Well I could see from that one sentence
that that was perfectly ridiculous, and it pushed me further into my natural drift, which was into
learning all the big ideas and all the big disciplines. So I wouldn't be a perfect damn fool who was
trying to think about one aspect of something that couldn't be removed from the totality of the
situation in a constructive fashion. And what I noted since the really big ideas carry 95% of the
*unclear*, it wasn't at all hard for me to pick up all the big ideas and all the big disciplines and
make them a standard part of my mental routines. Once you have the ideas of course they are no good
if you don't practice. You don't practice you lose it. So I went through life constantly practicing
this model of disciplinary approach. Well I can't tell you what that's done for me, it's made life
more fun, it's made me more constructive, it's made me more helpful to others, it's made me
enormously rich, you name it, that attitude really helps. Now there are dangers there, because it
works so well, that if you do it, you will frequently find you are sitting in the presence of some
other expert, maybe even an expert that's superior to you, supervising you. And you will know more
than he does about his own specialty, a lot more. You will see the correct answer when he's missed
it. That is a very dangerous position to be in. You can cause enormous offense by helpfully being
right in a way that causes somebody else to lose face. And I never found a perfect way to solve that
problem. I was a great poker player when I was young but I wasn't a good enough poker player so
people failed to sense that I thought I knew more than they did about their subjects and it gave a
lot of offense. Now I'm just regarded as eccentric but it was a difficult period to go through. And
my advice to you is to learn sometimes to keep your light under a bushel. One of my colleagues, also
number one in his class in law school, a great success in life worked for the supreme court etc...
He knew a lot and he tended to show it as a very young lawyer and one day the senior partner called
him in and said, "listen Chuck, I want to explain something to you. Your duty under any
circumstances is to behave in such a way that the client thinks he's the smartest person in the
world. If you have any little energy and insight available after that, use it to make your senior
partner look like the smartest person in the world. And only after you've satisfied those two
obligations do you want your light to shine at all". Well, that may be very good advice for rising
in a large firm. It wasn't what I did I always obeyed the drift of my nature and if other people
didn't like it I didn't need to be adored by everybody.

Another idea, and by the way when I talk about this multidisciplinary attitude I'm really following
a very key idea of the greatest lawyer of antiquity, Marcus Tullius Cicero. Cicero is famous for
saying, "a man who doesn't know what happened before he was born goes through life like a child".
That is a very correct idea of Cicero's. And he's right to ridicule somebody so foolish as not to
know what happened before he was born. But if you generalize Cicero as I think one should, there are
all these other things that you should know in addition to history and those other things are the
big ideas in all the other disciplines. And it doesn't help you just to know them enough just so you
can *unclear* them back on an exam and get an A. You have to learn these things in such a way that
they're in a mental latticework in your head and you automatically use them for the rest of your
life. If you do that I solemnly promise you that one day you'll be walking down the street and look
to your right and left and think, "my heavenly days! I'm now one of the few most competent people of
my whole age forward." If you don't do it, many of the brightest of you will live in the middle
ranks or in the shallows.

Another idea that I got, and it was encapsulated by that story the Dean recounted about the man who
wanted to know where he was going to die and he wouldn't go there, that rustic let that idea have a
profound truth in his hand. The way complex adaptive systems work and the way mental constructs work;
problems frequently get easier and I would even say usually are easier to solve if you turn around
in reverse. In other words if you want to help India, the question you should ask is not "how can I
help India?", you think "what's doing the worst damage in India? What would automatically do the
worst damage and how do I avoid it?" You'd think they are logically the same thing, they're not.
Those of you who have mastered algebra know that inversion frequently will solve problems which
nothing else will solve. And in life, unless you're more gifted than Einstein, inversion will help
you solve problems that you can't solve in other ways. But to use a little inversion now, what will
really fail in life? What do you want to avoid? Such an easy answer; sloth and unreliability. If
you're unreliable it doesn't matter what your virtues are, you're going to crater immediately. So
doing what you have faithfully engaged to do should be an automatic part of your conduct. You want
to avoid sloth and unreliability.

Another thing I think should be avoided is extremely intense ideology because it cabbages up one's
mind. You've seen that. You see a lot of it on TV you know preachers for instance, you know they've
all got different ideas about theology and a lot of them have minds that are made of cabbage. But
that can happen with political ideology. And if you're young it's easy to drift in to loyalties and
when you announce that you're a loyal member and you start shouting the orthodox ideology out what
you're doing is pounding it in, pounding it in and you're gradually ruining your mind so you want to
be very careful with this ideology. It's a big danger. In my mind I got a little example I use
whenever I think about ideology and it's these Scandinavian canoeists who succeeded in taming all
the rapids of Scandinavia and they thought they would tackle the whirlpools in the Aaron Rapids here
in the United States. The death rate was 100%. A big whirlpool is not something you want to go into
and I think the same is true about a really deep ideology. I have what I call an iron prescription
that helps me keep sane when I naturally drift toward preferring one ideology over another. And that
is I say "I'm not entitled to have an opinion on this subject unless I can state the arguments
against my position better than the people do who are supporting it. I think only when I reach that
stage am I qualified to speak." Now you can say that's too much of an iron discipline, it's not too
much of an iron discipline, it's not even that hard to do. It sounds a lot like the iron
prescription of Ferdinand the Great, "it's not necessary to hope in order to persevere." That
probably is too tough for most people, I don't think it's too tough for me but it's too tough for
most people. But this business of not drifting into extreme ideology is a very very important thing
in life if you want to have more correct knowledge and be wiser than other people. A heavy ideology
is very likely to do you in.

Another thing of course that does one in is the self serving bias to which we are all subject. You
think that your little me is entitled to do what it wants to do, and for instance why shouldn't the
true little me overspend my income? Well, there once was a man who became the most famous composer
in the world but he was utterly miserable most of the time and one of the reasons was he always
overspent his income, that was Mozart. If Mozart can't get by with this kind of asinine conduct, I
don't think you should try it.

Generally speaking, envy, resentment, revenge and self pity are disastrous modes of thought,
self-pity gets pretty close to paranoia, and paranoia is one of the very hardest things to reverse,
you do not want to drift into self-pity. I have a friend who carried a big stack of linen cards
about this thick, and when somebody would make a comment that reflected self pity, he would take out
one of the cards, take the top one off the stack and hand it to the person, and the card said, "your
story has touched my heart, never have I heard of anyone with as many misfortunes as you". Well you
can say that's waggery, but I suggest that every time you find you're drifting into self pity, I
don't care what the cause your child could be dying of cancer, self-pity is not going to improve the
situation, just give yourself one of those cards. It's a ridiculous way to behave, and when you
avoid it you get a great advantage over everybody else, almost everybody else, because self-pity is
a standard condition and yet you can train yourself out of it. And of course a self serving bias,
you want to get out of yourself, thinking that what's good for you is good for the wider
civilization and rationalizing all these ridiculous conclusions based on the subconscious tendency
to serve one's self. It's a terribly inaccurate way to think and of course you want to drive that
out of yourself because you want to be wise not foolish. You also have to allow for the self serving
bias of everybody else, because most people are not gonna remove it all that successfully, the only
condition being what it is. If you don't allow for self serving bias in your conduct, again you're a
fool. I watched the brilliant Harvard law Review trained general counsel of *unclear* lose his
career, and what he did was when the CEO was aware some underling has done something wrong the
general counsel said "gee we don't have any legal duty to report this but I think it's what we
should do it's our moral duty." Of course the general counsel was totally correct but of course it
didn't work it was a very unpleasant thing for the CEO to do and he put it off and put if off and of
course everything erode into a major scandal and down went the CEO and the general counsel with him.
The correct answer in situations like that was given by Ben Franklin, he said "if you want to
persuade appeal to interest not to reason." The self serving bias is so extreme. If the general
counsel said, "look this is going to erupt, it's something that will destroy you take away your
money, take away your status it's a perfect disaster", it would have worked! You want to appeal to
interest, you want to do it of lofty motives, but you should not avoid appealing to interest.

Another thing, perverse incentives. You don't want to be in a perverse incentive system that's
causing you to behave more and more foolishly or worse and worse. Incentives are too powerful a
controller of human cognition and human behavior and one of the things you are going to find in some
modern law firms is billable hour quotas and I could not have lived under a billable hour quota of
2,400 hours a year. That would have caused serious problems for me I wouldn't have done it and I
don't have a solution for you for that you have to figure it out for yourself but it's a significant
problem.

Perverse associations, also to be avoided. You particularly want to avoid working directly under
somebody you really don't admire and don't want to be like. It's very dangerous we are all subject
to control to some extent our authority figures strictly authority figures that are rewarding us.
And that requires some talent, the way I solved that is I figured out the people I did admire and I
maneuvered cleverly without criticizing anybody so I was working entirely under people I admired.
And a lot of law firms will permit that if you're shrewd enough to work it out and your outcome in
life will be way more satisfactory and way better if you work under people you really admire, the
alternative is not a good idea.

Objectivity maintenance. Well we all remember that Darwin paid special attention to disconfirming
evidence particularly to disconfirm something he believed and loved. Well objectivity maintenance
routines are totally required in life if you're going to be a correct thinker. And they were talking
about Darwin's attitude, special attention to the disconfirming evidence, and also to checklist
routines. Checklist routines avoid a lot of errors. You should have all this elementary wisdom and
then you should go through and have a checklist in order to use it. There is no other procedure that
will work as well.

A last idea that I found very important is I realized very early that non-egality would work better
in the parts of the world I wanted to inhabit. What do I mean by non-egality? I mean John Wood when
he was the number one basketball coach in the world, he just said to the bottom five players, "you
don't get to play your spurring partners", the top seven did the whole playing. Well the top seven
learned more, remember the learning machine, because they were doing all the playing. And when he
got to that system Wood won more than he'd ever won before. I think the game of life in many
respects is getting a lot of practice into the hands of the people that have the most aptitude to
learn and the most tendency to be learning machines. And if you want the very highest reaches of
human civilization that's where you have to go. You do not want to choose a brain surgeon for your
child among fifty applicants all of them just take turns during the procedure. You don't want your
airplanes designed that way. You don't want your Berkshire Hathaway's run that way. You want to get
the power into the right people. I frequently tell the story of Max Planck when he won the Nobel
prize and went around Germany giving lectures on quantum mechanics, and the chauffeur gradually
memorized the lecture and he said, "would you mind professor Planck just, it's so boring staying on
our routines, would you mind if I gave the lecture this time and you just sat in front with my
chauffeur's hat?" And Planck said sure. And the chauffeur got up and gave this long lecture on
quantum mechanics after which a physics professor stood up in the rear and asked a perfectly ghastly
question and the chauffeur said, "well I'm surprised that in an advanced city like Munich I get such
an elementary question, I'm going to ask my chauffeur to reply." Well the reason I tell that story
is not entirely to celebrate the quick wittiness of the protagonist. In this world we have two kinds
of knowledge, one is Planck knowledge, the people who really know, they paid the dues they have the
aptitude. Then we got chauffeur knowledge, they have learned to prattle the talk. They have a big
head of hair, they have a fine temper in the voice, they make a hell of an impression, but in the
end they've got chauffeur knowledge... I think I've just described practically every politician in
the United States. And you are gonna have the problem in your life of getting the responsibility
into the people of the Planck knowledge in a way for the people who have the chauffeur knowledge,
and there are huge forces working against you. My generation has failed you to some extent. We are
delivering to you in California a legislature where only the certified nuts from the left and the
certified nuts from the right are allowed to serve and none of them are removable. That's what my
generation has done for you, but you wouldn't like it to be too easy would you?

Another thing that I found is an intense interest of the subject is indispensable if you are really
going to excel. I could force myself to be fairly good in a lot of things, but I couldn't be really
good in anything where I didn't have an intense interest, so to some extent you're going to have to
follow me. If at all feasible you want to drift into doing something in which you really have a
natural interest.

Another thing you have to do of course is have a lot of assiduity. I like that word because it means
sit down in your ass until you do it. I've had marvelous partners all my life. I think I got them
partly because I tried to deserve them and partly because I was wise enough to select them and
partly maybe it was some luck. But two partners that I chose for one little phase of my life had the
following rule and they created a little designed build, construction team. And they sat down and
said, 2 man partnership, divide everything equally, here's the rule; "whenever we're behind in our
commitments to other people we will both work 14 hours a day until we caught up." Well needless to
say that firm didn't fail! The people died rich. It's such a simple idea.

Another thing of course is life will have terrible blows, horrible blows, unfair blows, doesn't
matter. And some people recover and others don't. And there I think the attitude of Epictetus is the
best. He thought that every mischance in life was an opportunity to behave well, every mischance in
life was an opportunity to learn something and your duty was not to be submerged in self-pity but to
utilize the terrible blow in a constructive fashion. That is a very good idea. You may remember the
epitaph which Epictetus left for himself, "Here lies Epictetus, a slave maimed in body, the ultimate
in poverty, and favored of the gods". Well that's the way Epictetus is now remembered. He said big
consequences. And he was favorite of the Gods! He was favored because he became wise, and he became
manly. Very good idea.

I got a final little idea because I'm all for prudence as well as opportunism. My grandfather was
the only federal judge in his city for nearly forty years and I really admired him. I'm his namesake.
And I'm Confucian enough that even now I sit here and I'm saying, "well, Judge Munger would be
pleased to see me here." So I'm Confucian enough all these years after my grandfather is dead to
carry the torch for my grandfather's values. And grandfather Munger was a federal judge at the time
and there were no pensions for widows of federal judges so he didn't save from his income while my
grandmother *unclear*. And being the kind of man he was he underspent his income all his life and
left her in comfortable circumstances. Along the way in the thirties my uncle's bank failed and
couldn't reopen and my grandfather saved the bank by taking over a third of his assets, good assets,
and putting them into the bank and taking up horrible assets in exchange. And of course it did save
the bank and while my grandfather took a loss he got most of his money back eventually. But I've
always remembered the example. And so when I got to college and I came across Houseman, I remember
the little poem from Houseman that went something like this:

"The thoughts of others
were light and fleeting,
of lovers' meeting
Luck or fame.
Mine were of trouble,
And mine were steady,
And I was ready
When trouble came."

You can say, "who wants to go through life anticipating trouble?". Well I did! All my life I've gone
through life anticipating trouble and here I am well along on my 84th year and like Epictetus I've
had a favored life. It didn't make me unhappy to anticipate trouble all the time and be ready to
perform adequately if trouble came. It didn't hurt me at all. In fact it helped me. So I quick claim
to you Houseman and Judge Munger.

The last idea that I want to give you as you go out into a profession that frequently puts a lot of
procedure and a lot of precautions and a lot of mumbo jumbo into what it does, this is not a fast
form which civilization can reach. A fast form which civilization can reach is a seamless web of
deserved trust. Not much procedure just totally reliable people correctly trusting one another.
That's the way an operating room works at the Mayo clinic. If a bunch of lawyers working *unclear*
process the patients would all die. So never forget when you're a lawyer that you may be rewarded
for selling this stuff but you don't have to buy it. In your own life what you want is a seamless
web of deserved trust. And if your proposed marriage contract has 47 pages my suggestion is do not
enter.

Well that's enough for one graduation. I hope these ruminations of an old man are useful to you. In
the end I'm like the Old Valiant-for-Truth in The Pilgrim's Progress; "My sword I leave to him who
can wear it."

