
Andrew Vickers

1.1  Statistics involves estimation, inference and study design.

1.2  Estimation is about trying to work out how large or small something is.

1.3  Inference is about drawing conclusions, usually by conducting a statistical test of a
     hypothesis.

1.4  A hypothesis is a statement about the world that could be tested to see whether it is true or
     false.

2.1  What most people call an "average" is what statistcians call a mean. To calculate a mean, think
     of your data as a list of numbers, add up all the numbers and then divide by the number of
     items on your list.

2.2  The median is the half way point of your list of numbers: half of the sample have values higher
     than the median and half have values lower than the median.

2.3  An outlier is when you have an observaton that doesn't follow the pattern of the data.

2.4  When you have outliers, the median often gives a fairer reflection of the data than the mean.

2.5  Generally speaking, means are better than medians for planning and making decisions.

3.1  Means and medians are useful for describing a data set. Means and medians are types of average,
     or central tendency.

3.2  You generally want to know not only the average of a data set, but how much the data vary
     around that average: a measure of spread.

3.3  The measure of spread normally reported with a mean is the standard deviation.

3.4  The measure of spread normally reported with a median is the interquartile range.

3.5  If data follow something close to a normal distribution, the mean and standard deviation can be
     used to work out all sorts of things about your data, but you have to do some calculations.

3.6  The median and interquartile range give quick information about data without the need for any
     calculation.

3.7  The median and interquartile range are also useful for describing data that are skewed.

3.8  Statistics used to describe a data set means and medians, standard deviations and interquartile
     ranges, are known as descriptive statistics.

4.1  Skewness describes the distribution of data.

4.2  Data are skewed if there are more observations below the mean than above, or vice versa.

4.3  The greater the proportion of observations above or below the mean, the more skewness you have.

4.4  Bias describes a problem with the design, conduct or analysis of a study.

4.5  A study is biased if the methods or statistical analyses cause an estimate to be too high or
     too low.

5.5  Variables are sometimes best described in terms of categories: sometimes means and medians
     aren't used and the statistician just gives the number and percentage in each category.

6.4  Drawing a graph of y and x, just like you did in high school, is a good way of understanding
     the relationship between them.

7.1  The normal distribution is what you get when you add up a large number of random events.

7.2  The normal distribution describes the variation of many natural phenomena, such as hemoglobin
     levels.

7.3  The normal distribution also describes the variation in results of a study, were we to repeat
     it many times.

8.1  Despite being called "normal", you rarely see a normal distribution in some areas of
     statistics.

8.2  Normal distributions are rare when the data come not from the whole population, but from a
     special sample, such as medical patients.

8.3  The normal distribution results from the addition of numerous random events.

8.4  Many phenomena result from the multiplication of random events.

8.5  Logarithms change multiplication into addition.

8.6  Non-normal data can sometimes be converted to a normal distribution by using the logarithm of
     the data.

9.1  Many statistical procedures are based on the assumption that the data are normally distributed.

9.2  These procedures include the use of the mean to describe a data set and hypothesis tests such
     as the t test, but there are many others.

9.3  There are no clear rules for determining whether a data set is close enough to the normal
     distribution to make it reasonable to use statistical procedures that assume normality.
     Ultimately, it is a judgment call on whether the method provides a "good enough" approximation.

10.1 There are two sorts of variation
     a. One is natural variation that can be observed (such as hair length).
     b. The other is the variation of study results, when a study is repeated (which we don't often
        do).

10.2 Standard deviation is used to describe the natural variation of something you can measure.

10.3 Standard error is used to describe the variation of study results--a statistic such as a mean
     or proportion calculated from study data--imagining hypothetically you were to repeat a study
     many times.

10.4 The variation of study results often follows a normal distribution, even if the data from each
     individual study are non-normal.

